charts/postgresql/README.md, before:

# postgresql

![Version: 0.1.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/Version-0.1.0-informational?style=flat-square) ![Type: application](https://img.shields.io/badge/Type-application-informational?style=flat-square)

CloudNativePG PostgreSQL cluster for shared database workloads

## Values

| Key | Type | Default | Description |
|-----|------|---------|-------------|
| cluster.bootstrap.initdb.database | string | `"seerr"` |  |
| cluster.bootstrap.initdb.owner | string | `"seerr"` |  |
| cluster.imageName | string | `"ghcr.io/cloudnative-pg/postgresql:17.2"` |  |
| cluster.instances | int | `1` |  |
| cluster.name | string | `"postgresql"` |  |
| cluster.postgresql.parameters.effective_cache_size | string | `"512MB"` |  |
| cluster.postgresql.parameters.maintenance_work_mem | string | `"64MB"` |  |
| cluster.postgresql.parameters.max_connections | string | `"50"` |  |
| cluster.postgresql.parameters.shared_buffers | string | `"128MB"` |  |
| cluster.postgresql.parameters.work_mem | string | `"8MB"` |  |
| cluster.resources.limits.cpu | string | `"1000m"` |  |
| cluster.resources.limits.memory | string | `"1Gi"` |  |
| cluster.resources.requests.cpu | string | `"100m"` |  |
| cluster.resources.requests.memory | string | `"256Mi"` |  |
| cluster.storage.size | string | `"10Gi"` |  |
| cluster.storage.storageClass | string | `"truenas-iscsi-rwo"` |  |
| global.annotations | object | `{}` |  |

----------------------------------------------
Autogenerated from chart metadata using [helm-docs v1.14.2](https://github.com/norwoodj/helm-docs/releases/v1.14.2)

Commit message:

fix: use cross-namespace DB connection for Seerr to PostgreSQL
CNPG secrets are namespace-scoped to database ns. Use direct env vars
with cross-namespace service FQDN and a manually-created password secret
in the jellyfin namespace instead.

charts/postgresql/README.md, after:

# postgresql

![Version: 0.1.0](https://img.shields.io/badge/Version-0.1.0-informational?style=flat-square) ![Type: application](https://img.shields.io/badge/Type-application-informational?style=flat-square)

CloudNativePG PostgreSQL cluster for shared database workloads

## Values

| Key | Type | Default | Description |
|-----|------|---------|-------------|
| cluster.bootstrap.initdb.database | string | `"seerr"` |  |
| cluster.bootstrap.initdb.owner | string | `"seerr"` |  |
| cluster.imageName | string | `"ghcr.io/cloudnative-pg/postgresql:17.2"` |  |
| cluster.instances | int | `1` |  |
| cluster.name | string | `"postgresql"` |  |
| cluster.postgresql.parameters.effective_cache_size | string | `"512MB"` |  |
| cluster.postgresql.parameters.maintenance_work_mem | string | `"64MB"` |  |
| cluster.postgresql.parameters.max_connections | string | `"50"` |  |
| cluster.postgresql.parameters.shared_buffers | string | `"128MB"` |  |
| cluster.postgresql.parameters.work_mem | string | `"8MB"` |  |
| cluster.resources.limits.cpu | string | `"1000m"` |  |
| cluster.resources.limits.memory | string | `"1Gi"` |  |
| cluster.resources.requests.cpu | string | `"100m"` |  |
| cluster.resources.requests.memory | string | `"256Mi"` |  |
| cluster.storage.size | string | `"10Gi"` |  |
| cluster.storage.storageClass | string | `"truenas-iscsi-rwo"` |  |
| global.annotations | object | `{}` |  |
| secretExports | list | `[]` | Secrets to copy to other namespaces for cross-namespace access |

----------------------------------------------
Autogenerated from chart metadata using [helm-docs v1.14.2](https://github.com/norwoodj/helm-docs/releases/v1.14.2)
